.TH ANNEAL_POST 1 "September 2019" "Version 2019.09.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
anneal_post \- parse output annealing log file from fltinv

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B anneal_post
.BI -f " anneal_log_file"
.BI -nit " niterations"
.BI -nburn " niterations_burnin"
.BI -best " best_slip_file"
.BI -plocked " probability_locked_file"
.BI -slip:mean " mean_slip_file"
.BI -slip:marg " iflt slip_marg1d_file"
.BI -flocked[:subset " subset_file" ] " fraction_locked_file"

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B anneal_post
reads the output file produced by
.B fltinv
and prints relevant results of the search.
It is especially designed for searches that implement the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
(annealing temperature = 1) to generate probabilistic estimates of fault slip.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -f " anneal_log_file"
The annealing log file produced by
.BR fltinv .
This should have the format:

.IR "" "Iteration " it_number " Temperature " temp " Objective " objective
.BR [ (rejected) ]
.br
.IR 1 | 0
.I slip_ss slip_ds
.IR 1 | 0
.br
\[char46]
.br
\[char46]
.br
\[char46]

where the first field indicates the current model locking state (1=locked)
and the fourth field indicates the proposed model locking state.
The first and fourth columns are equal if the proposed model is accepted
and different if the proposed model is rejected.

.TP
.BI -nit " niterations"
The number of iterations to read. A warning will be printed if you have not read
all of the iterations available.

.TP
.BI -nburn " niterations_burnin"
The number of iterations starting from the beginning to discard, i.e., the "burn-in" stage
of the search.

.TP
.BI -best " best_slip_file"
The locking state, strike-slip, and dip-slip for the best-fitting (lowest objective function)
solution.

.TP
.BI -plocked " probability_locked_file"
The probability of each sub-fault being locked. For each sub-fault in the
search, the probability is:

.IR plocked = nlocked / niterations

where
.I nlocked
is the number of iterations in which that sub-fault is locked in the search and
.I niterations
is the total number of iterations in the search minus the number of burn-in steps.

.TP
.BI -slip:mean " mean_slip_file"
The mean strike-slip and dip-slip for each sub-fault.

.TP
.BI -slip:marg " iflt slip_marg1d_file"
Dump all of the the strike-slip and dip-slip values of sub-fault
.I iflt
to a file. Plotting this in a histogram yields the 1-D marginal slip magnitude
for the sub-fault.
This option can be repeated up to 1000 times.

.TP
.BI -flocked " fraction_locked_file"
Calculate the fraction of all sub-faults that are locked in each iteration.

.TP
.BI -flocked:subset " subset_file fraction_locked_file"
Calculate the fraction of sub-faults listed in
.I subfault_file
that are locked in each iteration.
This option can be repeated up to 10 times.

.RS
