.TH COLORTOOL 1 "March 2018" "Version 2018.03.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
colortool \- convert between color spaces and create color palettes

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B colortool
.BI -hue " hue1,hue2"
.BI -lightness " lightness1,lightness2"
.BI -chroma " chroma1,chroma2 " |
.B -convert
.IR input_type = x,y,z
.IB output_type
.BI
.BI [...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B colortool
implements conversions between lightness-chroma-hue, red-green-blue, and hue-saturation-value
color spaces. It operates in two modes: generating perceptually linear (constant lightness
gradient) RGB color palettes or converting between color spaces.

Basic color theory:
Human eyes (non-color-blind) have three light detectors sensing broad frequency bands centered on
445 nm (blue), 535 nm (green), and 575 nm (red). We perceive the combination of these signals
as colors that have a lightness, chroma (kind of like saturation), and hue. This can be represented
mathematically with a polar coordinate system, where lightness is the z value, chroma is the radius,
and hue is the angle. We are sensitive to changes in all of these values, but we ascribe particular
significance to differences in lightness. Note that LCH is NOT the same as hue-saturation-value
.BR "" ( colortool 
can convert between these representations). A computer produces combinations of colors in
three narrow bands (red, green, and blue; RGB), which can also be converted to and from LCH.
Note: currently,
.B colortool
only implements colors for a perfectly reflecting diffuser surface in daylight.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -lightness " lightness1,lightness2"
Starting and ending lightness values, where 0=black and 100=white (default:
.IR lightness1 "=0, " lightness2 =100)
.TP
.BI -chroma " chroma1,chroma2"
Starting and ending chroma values (default:
.IR chroma1 "=40, " chroma2 =40)
.TP
.BI -hue " hue1,hue2"
Starting and ending hue values (default:
.IR hue1 "=0, " hue2 =360).
Hue=0=magenta, 40=red, 60=orange, 100=yellow, 135=green, 305=blue, 330=purple.
.TP
.BI -convert " input_type" = x , y , z " " output_type
Convert color in one set of coordinates to another.
.IR Input_type " and " output_type
can take the following values: LCH, LAB (where a=chroma*cos(hue), b=chroma*sin(hue)), RGB, or HSV. 
.IR X ", " y ", and " z
correspond to the components of the defined color system.
.TP
.BR -n[colors] " N"
Number of color increments to output (default: N=10)
.TP
.BR "-gmt [" "cpt" ]
Write output to GMT color palette with
.IR zmin =0
and
.IR zmax =1
(default: print R/G/B list).
.TP
.BI -limits " zmin" , zmax
Minimum and maximum values for GMT color palette
.BR "" ( -gmt
option).
.TP
.BI -dz " dz"
Increment for GMT color palette 
.BR "" ( -gmt
option)
(default: 10 colors)
.TP
.BI -T zmin / zmax / dz
Minimum and maximum values and increment for GMT color palette
.BR "" ( -gmt
option), in GMT makecpt format.
.TP
.BI -D
Set background and foreground colors of GMT color palette
.BR "" ( -gmt
option) to
.I zmin
and
.IR zmax ,
respectively.
.TP
.B -verbose
Print program steps to standard error.
.TP
.B -h
Short online help
.TP
.B -d
Detailed online help

.RS
