.TH EQEMPIRICAL 1 "May 2020" "Version 2020.05.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
eqempirical \- print earthquake fault characteristics from empirical relations

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B eqempirical
.BI -mag " magnitude"
.BI -model " relation_name"
.B [-list]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B eqempirical
calculates the faulting characteristics corresponding to the earthquake
.I magnitude
for several different empirical relations.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -mag " magnitude"
Earthquake moment magnitude

.TP
.BI -model " relation_name"
Print the estimated fault parameters for
.IR relation_name .
The following empirical relations are available:

.BR WC :
Wells, D.L., Coppersmith, K.J. (1994). New empirical relationships among magnitude, rupture
length, rupture width, rupture area, and surface displacement. Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America, 84, 974-1002.

.BR MB :
Mai, P.M., Beroza, G.C. (2000). Source scaling properties from finite- fault-rupture models.
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, 90, 604-615.

.BR B :
Blaser, L., Kruger, F., Ohrnberger, M., Scherbaum, F. (2010). Scaling relations of earthquake
source parameter estimates with special focus on subduction environment. Bulletin of the
Seismological Society of America, 100, pp. 2914-2926.

.BR YM :
Yen, Y.-T., Ma, K.-F. (2011). Source-scaling relationship for M 4.6-8.9 earthquakes,
specifically for earthquakes in the collision zone of Taiwan. Bulletin of the Seismological
Society of America, 101, 464-481.

.BR AH :
Allen, T.I., Hayes, G.P. (2017). Alternative rupture‐scaling relationships for subduction
interface and other offshore environments. Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America
107, 1240-1253.


.TP
.B -list
List available models (same list as above, but built into program).

.RS
