.TH GRID 1 "June 2019" "Version 2019.06.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
grid \- generate regularly spaced points

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B grid [...options...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grid
produces regularly spaced points with options for projecting points onto a dipping surface
or on a vertically dipping plane.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -x " x1 " [ x2 ]
Minimum and (optional) maximum x-coordinates

.TP
.BI -dx " dx"
X-coordinate increment

.TP
.BI -nx " nx"
Number of points from minimum to maximum x-coordinate (inclusive)

.TP
.BI -y " y1 " [ y2 ]
Minimum and (optional) maximum y-coordinates

.TP
.BI -dy " dy"
Y-coordinate increment

.TP
.BI -ny " ny"
Number of points from minimum to maximum y-coordinate (inclusive)

.TP
.BI -z " z1 " [ z2 ]
Minimum and (optional) maximum z-coordinates

.TP
.BI -dz " dz"
Z-coordinate increment

.TP
.BI -nz " nz"
Number of points from minimum to maximum z-coordinate (inclusive)

.TP
.BI -dip " x0 y0 z0 strike dip"
Project z-coordinates onto dipping plane with geometry
.I strike
(degrees clockwise from north) and
.IR dip ,
(degrees from horizontal) containing the point
.IR "" ( x0 ", " y0 ", " z0 ).
Default coordinate type is Cartesian. Define
.I x0
and
.I y0
as geographic coordinates with
.BR -geo .

.TP
.BI -xsec " x0 y0 azimuth "
Generate points on a vertically dipping plane containing the point
.IR "" ( x0 ", " y0 )
and with orientation
.I azimuth
measured clockwise from north.
Treat
.I x
as the horizontal distance parallel to the azimuth and
.I y
as the horizontal distance perpendicular to the azimuth.
Default coordinate type is Cartesian. Define
.I x0
and
.I y0
as geographic coordinates with
.BR -geo .

.TP
.BI -R xmin / xmax / ymin / ymax
Define
.IR xmin ", " xmax ", " ymin ", and " ymax
with GMT syntax.

.TP
.BI -geo
Treat
.B -dip
and
.B -xsec
coordinates as lon and lat instead of x and y.

.TP
.BI -exp
Change definition of number of points or increment from linear to multiplicative.
.I Nx
and
.I ny
specify number of points (including endpoints) with an equal ratio spacing, and
.I dx
and
.I dy
become multiplicative factors (required to be greater than 1).

.TP
.BI -o " output_file"
Output file (default prints to standard output)

.RS
