.TH INSAR.SH 1 "December 2020" "Version 2020.12.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
insar.sh \- plot line-of-sight surface displacements for a fault source

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B insar.sh
.I source_type source_file azimuth inclination wavelength
.BI [...options...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B insar.sh
computes line-of-sight displacement for an earthquake source embedded in an elastic
half-space, corresponding to a satellite look geometry. The line-of-sight and "wrapped"
(i.e., interferometric) displacements are plotted them on a map, contoured as colors.
Most of the map variables are determined automatically, but the user can specify some
parameters to customize the appearance.

.SH OPTIONS

.B REQUIRED ARGUMENTS

.TP
.I source_type
Choose from one of
.IR MT ,
.IR FLT ,
.IR FFM ,
or
.IR FSP .
The format of
.I source_file
depends on this type:

.IR MT :
evlo evla evdp str dip rak mag
.br
.IR FLT :
evlo evla evdp str dip rak slip wid len
.br
.IR FFM :
finite fault model in USGS .param format
.br
.IR FSP :
finite fault model in SRCMOD FSP format

.TP
.I source_file
Path to fault source file

.TP
.I azimuth
Horizontal look angle from satellite to ground surface (0=north)

.TP
.I inclination
Vertical look angle from satellite to ground surface (0=horizontal, 90=vertical)

.TP
.I wavelength
Satellite observation wavelength, in meters. Note that the signal travels to
and from the satellite, so the two-way path is accounted for in the interferogram.


.TP
.B CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS

.TP
.BI -R west / east / south / north
Map limits in GMT format


.TP
.BI -autothr " threshold"
Automatic displacement threshold for generating map limits (default: 0.001 m)


.TP
.BI -ngrid " nn"
Number of points along each dimension for color contours
(default: 100/dimension)


.TP
.B -seg
Plot finite fault segments individually (default: outline surrounds all segments)


.TP
.BI -emprel " empirical_relation"
Select empirical relation for converting magnitude to rectangular fault source.
Default is Wells & Coppersmith (1994).
See
.B man o92util
for alternatives (look for
.B -empirical
option).


.TP
.BI -hdefbin " /path/to/hdef/bin"
Define path to Hdef executables. Default behavior is to look for Hdef executables
in user environment.


.TP
.BI -o " output_file"
Basename for output file. Script produces
.IR output_file ".ps and " output_file .pdf
(default: insar)


.TP
.B -noclean
Keep temporary files made during script execution instead of deleting these.

.RS
