.TH MTUTIL 1 "June 2019" "Version 2019.06.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
mtutil \- manipulate earthquake moment tensor, magnitude, and kinematic parameters

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B mtutil -sdr|-mij|-pnt|-mag|-mom
.BI [ input ]
.B -sdr|-mij|-pnt|-mag|-mom|-ternary|-dcp|-sv
.BI [ output ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mtutil
converts between earthquake source parameters. Inputs can be strike/dip/rake,
moment tensor components, moment tensor principal axes, seismic moment, or magnitude. Outputs can be
any of these values (when possible, e.g., you cannot convert a seismic moment to strike/dip/rake), a
ternary representation of the focal mechanism (Frohlich, 1992), double-couple percentage, or slip vectors.
See Jost and Herrmann (1989) for more details.

If
.I input
is a file name, then
.B mtutil
will attempt to read inputs from that file.
If
.I input
is a comma-separated list of numbers, then inputs will be read this list of arguments.
If
.I input
is not provided, then
.B mtutil
will read from standard input.
.B mtutil
will print the results to standard output unless a file name is defined as
.IR output .


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B INPUTS

.TP
.BI "-sdr [" input_file | strike , dip , rake ]
.IR Strike ", " dip ", and " rake
as defined by Aki and Richards (2002).
.I Strike
is in degrees clockwise from north,
.I dip
is in degrees down from horizontal, and
.I rake
is in degrees counter-clockwise from the strike-parallel direction along the fault plane.

.TP
.BI "-mij [" input_file | mrr , mtt , mpp , mrt , mrp , mtp ]
Moment tensor components as published by the Global CMT project
(Gilbert and Dziewonski, 1975; Ekstrom et al., 2012), where
.I r
is the radial (unit vector corresponds to vertical) direction,
.I t
is co-latitude (unit vector corresponds to south), and
.I p
is longitude (unit vector corresponds to east).

Ekstrom et al. (2012) define a geographic Cartesian coordinate system for the
Global Centroid Moment Tensor project,
where
.IR x =north,
.IR y =east,
and
.IR z =down.
Some moment tensor solutions are reported in this
system (e.g., NIED F-net solutions from Japan). In this case:
.br
.IR mrr " =  mzz"
.br
.IR mtt " =  mxx"
.br
.IR mpp " =  myy"
.br
.IR mrt " =  mxz"
.br
.IR mrp " = -myz"
.br
.IR mtp " = -mxy"

Moment tensors behave similarly to stress tensors. You can use
.B mtutil
to compute the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of stress tensors using -mij and -pnt,
remembering to account for the coordinate transformation.
In local
.IR e ast,
.IR n orth,
and
.IR v ertical
(positive up) coordinates, the components of the tensor become:
.br
.IR mrr " =  mvv"
.br
.IR mtt " =  mnn"
.br
.IR mpp " =  mee"
.br
.IR mrt " = -mnv"
.br
.IR mrp " =  mev"
.br
.IR mtp " = -men"
.br
The eigenvectors computed by
.B -pnt
are reported in the same x=east, y=north, z=vertical reference frame.

.TP
.BI "-pnt [" input_file | px , py , pz , nx , ny , nz , tx , ty , tz , pmag , nmag , tmag ]
Moment tensor eigenvectors and eigenvalues, also referred to as P (maximum compression), N
(neutral), and T (maximum tension) axes. Note:
.I pmag
is typically negative and
.I tmag
is typically positive.

.TP
.BI "-mag [" input_file | magnitude ]
Moment
.IR magnitude " = 2/3*log10(" moment ")-6.0,"
where the seismic moment is in N*m.

.TP
.BI "-mom [" input_file | moment ]
Seismic
.I moment
in N*m.

.TP
.B OUTPUTS
.TP
.BI "-sdr [" output_file ]
When used as the output option with
.B -sdr
as the input, prints
.IR strike ", " dip ", and " rake
of the second nodal plane. When used as the output option with
.B -mij
or
.BR -pnt ,
prints results for both nodal planes.
.TP
.BI "-mij [" output_file ]
Moment tensor components:
.IR  mrr ", " mtt ", " mpp ", " mrt ", " mrp ", and " mtp
.TP
.BI "-pnt [" output_file ]
Moment tensor eigenvectors (normalized to length=1) and eigenvalues:
.IR  px ", " py ", " pz ", " nx ", " ny ", " nz ", " tx ", " ty ", " tz ", " pmag ", " nmag ", and " tmag
.TP
.BI "-mag [" output_file ]
Moment
.IR magnitude " = 2/3*log10(" moment ")-6.0"
.TP
.BI "-mom [" output_file ]
Seismic
.I moment
in N*m.
.TP
.BI "-ternary [" output_file ]
Earthquake mechanism characterization from Frohlich (1992):
.IR fraction_thrust ", " fraction_strike-slip ", and " fraction_normal ,
which add up to one.
.TP
.BI "-dcp [" output_file ]
Double couple percentage:
.IR dcp =min(1-2*abs( nmag / pmag ),1-2*abs( nmag / tmag ))
.TP
.BI "-sv [" output_file ]
Slip vector
.IR east ,
.IR north ,
and
.I vertical
components

.SH REFERENCES
.TP
Aki, K., and Richards, P.G. (2002).
Quantitative Seismology. University Science Books.
.TP
Frohlich, C. (1992).
Triangle diagrams: ternary graphs to display similarity and diversity of
earthquake focal mechanisms. Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 75, 193-198.
.TP
Gilbert, F., Dziewonski, A.M. (1975).
An application of normal mode theory to the retrieval of structural parameters and
source mechanisms from seismic spectra.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, 278, 187–269.
.TP
Jost, M.L., Herrmann, R.B. (1989).
A student's guide to and review of moment tensors.
Seismological Research Letters 60, 37-57.

.RS
