.TH PLATEMOTION 1 "June 2019" "Version 2019.06.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
platemotion \- compute velocities from plate pairs

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B platemotion
.BI -plate " plate1" / plate2 " | -pole" " lon" / lat / rot_vel
.BI [-model " NAME" ]
.BI "[-list [" " MODEL" ]]
.BI [-f " input_file" ]
.BI [-o " output_file" ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B platemotion
computes velocities at a geographic location corresponding to a pair of plates
from a plate circuit model or from an Euler pole.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -plate " plate1" / plate2
Plate pair from built-in plate circuit, with
.I plate2
moving with respect to a fixed
.IR plate1 .
Use
.B -list
to see available plates for each plate circuit.

.TP
.BI -pole " lon" / lat / rot_vel
Euler pole for plate pair located at
.IR "" ( lon ", " lat )
and with rotational velocity
.I rot_vel
(in degrees/million years, with positive indicating counter-clockwise).

.TP
.BI -model " NUVEL-1A" | MORVEL | MORVEL56 | ITRF05 | ITRF08
Plate circuit to use with
.B -plate
option.
See
.B REFERENCES
for more details about each plate circuit.

.TP
.BI -f " input_file"
Input file (default reads standard input)

.TP
.BI -o " output_file"
Output file (default prints to standard output)


.SH REFERENCES
.TP
Altamimi, Z., Collilieux, X., Legrand, J., Garayt, B., Boucher, C. (2007).
ITRF2005: A new release of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame based on time series of
station positions and Earth Orientation Parameters.
Journal of Geophysical Research 112, B09401.
.TP
Altamimi, Z., Metivier, L., Collilieux, X. (2012).
ITRF2008 plate motion model.
Journal of Geophysical Research 117, B07402.
.TP
Argus, D.F., Gordon, R.G., DeMets, C. (2011).
Geologically current motion of 56 plates relative to the no-net-rotation reference frame.
Geochemistry Geophysics Geosystems 12, 1-13.
.TP
DeMets, C., Gordon, R.G., Argus, D.F., Stein, S. (1990).
Current plate motions. Geophysical Journal International 101, 425-478.
.TP
DeMets, C., Gordon, R.G., Argus, D.F., Stein, S. (1994).
Effect of recent revisions to the geomagnetic reversal time-scale on estimates of current
plate motions. Geophysical Research Letters 21, 2191-2194.
.TP
DeMets, C., Gordon, R.G., & Argus, D.F. (2010).
Geologically current plate motions. Geophysical Journal International 181, 1-80.
.RS
