.TH TERNARY.SH 1 "June 2019" "Version 2019.06.01" "User Manuals"

.SH NAME
ternary.sh \- plot a ternary focal mechanism diagram

.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
.B ternary.sh
.BI -f " input_file"
.BI [-c " cpt_file" ]
.BI [-s " symbol_scale" ]
.BI [-j " jitter" ]
.BI [-a " postscript_file" ]
.BI [-x " x0" , y0 , width ]
.BI [-t " font_size" ]
.BI [--shift_ss " dx" , dy ]
.BI [--shift_th " dx" , dy ]
.BI [--shift_no " dx" , dy ]
.BI [--frac_simple " fraction" ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ternary.sh
takes focal mechanism data in fraction thrust, strike-slip, and normal representation
(Frohlich, 1992) and plots the points on a ternary diagram. This ternary representation can be
computed using the Hdef program
.BR mtutil .
Additional information and flags can be specified to color and scale the symbols.

Frohlich (1992) originally suggested using the azimuthal gnomonic projection (Richardus
and Adler, 1972). Later, Frohlich (2001) noted that this projection is not equal-area,
distorting the percentage of the triangle taken up by different ranges of mechanisms.
A combined gnomonic + simple projection was proposed so that the ternary diagram becomes
close to equal-area. This combined projection is now the default for
.BR ternary.sh ,
but the user can specify the fraction of simple projection with the
.B --frac_simple
option.

This script uses standard bash tools (including awk and sed), the Generic Mapping Tools,
Ghostscript, and the Hdef program
.BR grid .

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI -f " input_file"
Ternary data in format
.IR frac_thrust ,
.IR frac_strikeslip ,
and
.IR frac_normal .
Optionally, add a fourth column with
.I magnitude
to scale the symbols by the value of the magnitude cubed.
If there is a fifth column and a
.I cpt_file
is defined, then color the symbols by the value in the fifth column.

.TP
.BI -c " cpt_file"
If the
.I input_file
contains five columns, use this color palette file to color symbols by the fifth column.

.TP
.BI -s " symbol_scale"
Symbol scaling factor (default: 0.2). If there are three columns in
.IR input_file ,
then this is the size of all symbols. If there are four or five columns,
then this is the scaling factor based on the value in the fourth column cubed.

.TP
.BI -j " jitter"
Randomly perturb the locations of symbols by the value
.IR jitter .
Useful when there are many symbols that may plot on top of each other.

.TP
.BI -a " postscript_file"
Append the PostScript produced by
.B ternary.sh
to an existing PostScript file

.TP
.BI -x " x0" , y0 , width
Location of lower left corner of schematic relative to origin and width of schematic,
all in inches (default: 1,1,5).

.TP
.BI -t " font_size"
Define the font size for labeling the corners of the ternary diagram (default: scaled
with
.I width
of figure).

.TP
.BI --shift_ss " dx" , dy
.TP
.BI --shift_th " dx" , dy
.TP
.BI --shift_no " dx" , dy
Shift the location of the label text by
.I dx
and
.I dy
inches.

.TP
.BI --frac_simple " fraction"
Define the percentage of simple projection used to make the ternary plot (default: 0.33).
See note above and Frohlich (2001).


.SH REFERENCES
.TP
Frohlich, C. (1992).
Triangle diagrams: ternary graphs to display similarity and diversity of earthquake
focal mechanisms.
Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 75, 193-198.

.TP
Frohlich, C. (2001).
Display and quantitative assessment of distributions of earthquake focal mechanisms.
Geophysical Journal International 144, 300-308.

.TP
Richardus, P., Adler, R.K. (1972).
Map Projections North Holland.
Amsterdam, 174 pp.

.RS
